---
layout: post
title:  "The Rider"
---
**Who is a Rider? As one may ask**

> 1. Rider is a man on a horse riding towards his goal.
> 2. He leads by acting and uses words wisely so not to waste time or attract opposition
> 3. He calls on his fellow riders to rise up and ride with him but does not wait. Others see his vision and feel a sense or urgency to ride with him.
> 4. He picks the best option to get to his goal based on the difficulty of the journey ahead and is willing to pivot to a new one if it doesn’t work out. But he does not wait
> 5. He weighs options that are hard to reverse and takes time to make the decision
> 6. The rider rests. He knows his body and is able to make wise decisions on when to push and when to slow down since he knows that burning out will keep him away from his goal
> 7. He prioritizes all the nagging work to ensure he has the mental space to see the vision and track towards his goal.
> 8. The rider has a lot of strongly opionated people around him. He uses data to make his arguments and in areas where data is hard to gather, he uses gut instincts and pushes ahead. He does not break bridges with others
> 9. The rider does stuff that he things is right and asks for forgiveness later. He doesn’t always ask permission from authority to do the right things if he truly believes it is.
> 10. He has a high moral compass and knows that he is not above the law. He follows the rules of the game while making up his own when such a rule doesn’t exist.
> 11. He empathizes with people but knows that marching towards the goal is the most important thing.
> 12. He knows he cannot ride alone to go the distance. He assembles his team of confidants to ride with him not through authority but through thoughtful leadership. They support him on his journey.
> 13. He identified the right destination  (goal) to ride to. He spends time to pin point it. Avoid getting to the wrong destination even if it means spending time early.
> 14. He thinks in frameworks and principles that lets him solve a vast array of problems and not just the immediate ones. Sometimes that takes time away from solving immediate ones and he fights for it.
> 15. Although the rider can sometimes feel like he is a servent and asking for guidance, it is only in the extent of seeking guidance to get to the destination and not to know the destination itself.

